>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY MAY 9:
THE LEADER OF CHINA IS IN RED
SQUARE AS RUSSIA DISPLAYS ITS
MILITARY MIGHT.
WHAT THE NEW RUSSIA-CHINA
ALLIANCE MEANS FOR THE UNITED
STATES.
TEACHERS IN AUSTIN STRUGGLE TO
KEEP UP WITH SOARING REAL ESTATE
PRICES.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
WARREN BUFFETT INVESTS IN A PLAN
TO TRY TO REVERSE DECADES OF
POVERTY IN CITIES ACROSS
AMERICA.
>> GIVEN A REASONABLE CHANCE, A
REASONABLE ENVIRONMENT IN WHICH
TO OPERATE THAT KIDS CAN GROW UP
TO REACH THE POTENTIAL THAT
OTHERWISE THEY NEVER WOULD HAVE
HAD A SHOT AT.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM KLRU IN AUSTIN, TEXAS,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE BEGIN TONIGHT WITH GOOD NEWS.
WORD FROM THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION THAT LIBERIA IS NOW
OFFICIALLY FREE OF EBOLA.
THE REPORT TOUCHED OFF
CELEBRATORY DANCING TODAY IN THE
CAPITAL CITY OF MONROVIA.
LIBERIA HAS NOW GONE 42 DAYS
WITHOUT A NEW CASE OF EBOLA
BEING DETECTED-- TWICE THE
LENGTH OF THE INCUBATION PERIOD.
NEARLY 5,000 OF THE 11,000 WHO
DIED OF THE DISEASE SINCE MARCH
OF 2014 WERE LIBERIAN.
THE DISEASE IS STILL PRESENT IN
THE NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES OF
SIERRA LEONE AND GUINEA.
A WEAPONS BREAKTHROUGH FOR NORTH
KOREA.
THE COUNTRY ANNOUNCED TODAY THAT
IT SUCCESSFULLY TEST-LAUNCHED A
BALLISTIC MISSILE FROM A
SUBMARINE FOR THE FIRST TIME.
OFFICIAL PHOTOS SHOW THE
COUNTRY'S LEADER, KIM JONG UN,
OBSERVING THE UNDERWATER LAUNCH
FROM THE DECK OF A SHIP.
SECURITY EXPERTS WARN THAT
MISSILES LAUNCHED UNDERWATER ARE
MORE DIFFICULT TO DETECT THAN
THOSE LAUNCHED FROM LAND.
SYRIA'S CHEMICAL WEAPONS PROGRAM
WAS APPARENTLY MORE EXTENSIVE
THAN THE ASSAD REGIME LET ON.
DIPLOMATIC SOURCES QUOTED BY
REUTERS SAY TRACES OF SARIN AND
VX NERVE AGENT WERE DISCOVERED
AT A MILITARY RESEARCH SITE THAT
HAD NOT BEEN DISCLOSED BY SYRIAN
AUTHORITIES.
SYRIA PROMISED TO DESTROY ITS
CHEMICAL WEAPONS STOCKPILE AFTER
SIGNING A DEAL BROKERED BY
RUSSIA AND THE UNITED STATES IN
2013.
IN IRAQ TODAY, DOZENS OF
INMATES, INCLUDING A NUMBER OF
CONVICTED TERRORISTS, ESCAPED
FROM A PRISON 50 MILES NORTH OF
BAGHDAD.
THE ESCAPES OCCURRED AFTER A
RIOT THAT LED TO THE DEATHS OF
50 INMATES AND 12 GUARDS.
AUTHORITIES THERE SAY THE
INCIDENT BEGAN WHEN PRISONERS
APPEARED TO BE FIGHTING WITH ONE
ANOTHER.
WHEN GUARDS INTERVENED,
PRISONERS ATTACKED THEM AND
STRIPPED THEM OF THEIR WEAPONS.
ACCORDING TO THE BBC, ISIS
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY.
RUSSIA TODAY MARKED THE 70th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE DEFEAT OF
NAZI GERMANY DURING WORLD WAR II
BY STAGING A MILITARY PARADE IN
RED SQUARE, THE LARGEST SINCE
THE BREAKUP OF THE SOVIET UNION.
THE EVENT WAS ATTENDED BY THE
LEADER OF CHINA BUT BOYCOTTED BY
MOST WESTERN NATIONS.
DURING A SPEECH, RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
CRITICIZED THE UNITED STATES,
BUT NOT BY NAME.
>> (translated): THE BASIC
PRINCIPLES OF INTERNATIONAL
COOPERATION ARE INCREASINGLY
IGNORED, PRINCIPLES WON AFTER
THE HARDSHIP OF WAR.
WE HAVE SEEN ATTEMPTS TO CREATE
A UNIPOLAR WORLD.
WE SEE A MILITARY BLOC-MENTALITY
EXPANDING.
>> Sreenivasan: THE FIRST
TROPICAL STORM OF THE YEAR IS
HEADED FOR THE CAROLINAS, THREE
WEEKS BEFORE THE START OF THE
ATLANTIC HURRICANE SEASON.
TROPICAL STORM ANA IS EXPECTED
TO HIT AROUND THE BORDER OF
NORTH AND SOUTH CAROLINA EARLY
TOMORROW MORNING.
IT NOW HAS WINDS OF UP TO 60
MILES AN HOUR, BUT IT IS
EXPECTED TO WEAKEN BEFORE MAKING
LANDFALL.
CALIFORNIA HEALTH OFFICIALS ARE
REPORTING A SHARP RISE IN HEROIN
POISONING, COMMONLY FROM
OVERDOSES.
THEY SAY THE NUMBER OF YOUNG
ADULTS TREATED IN HOSPITAL
EMERGENCY ROOMS LAST YEAR
INCREASED SIXFOLD DURING THE
LAST TEN YEARS.
THE NUMBERS WERE ALSO UP
SIGNIFICANTLY IN OTHER AGE
GROUPS.
DEATHS NATIONALLY FROM HEROIN
OVERDOSES TRIPLED BETWEEN 2010
AND 2013, ACCORDING TO A RECENT
REPORT BY THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL.
AND AUTHORITIES SAY A SIGNED
FIRST EDITION COPY OF GABRIEL
GARCIA MARQUEZ'S NOVEL, "ONE
HUNDRED YEARS OF SOLITUDE,"
VALUED AT APPROXIMATELY $60,000,
WAS RECOVERED TODAY AT A USED
BOOK STALL IN BOGOTA, COLOMBIA.
IT HAD BEEN STOLEN FROM A
COLLECTOR WHILE ON DISPLAY AT
THAT CITY'S INTERNATIONAL BOOK
FAIR LAST WEEKEND.
THERE WAS NO WORD OF ANY
ARRESTS.
THE AUTHOR DIED LAST YEAR.
HE WAS 87.
>> Sreenivasan: AS WE MENTIONED,
THE CHINESE LEADER WAS IN MOSCOW
TODAY AS RUSSIA PARADED ITS
MILITARY HARDWARE THROUGH RED
SQUARE.
JUST YESTERDAY, THE TWO
COUNTRIES SIGNED 32 AGREEMENTS
INCLUDING WHAT'S BEING DESCRIBED
AS A NONAGGRESSION PACT IN
CYBERSPACE.
ALL THIS, AT A TIME OF SEVERELY
STRAINED RELATIONS BETWEEN
RUSSIA AND THE WEST.
ARE WE GOING BACK TO THE FUTURE,
WITH RUSSIA AND CHINA LINED UP
AGAINST THE WEST?
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED NOW FROM
BERKELEY CALIFORNIA BY ORVILLE
SCHELL.
HE'S THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTER
ON U.S.-CHINA RELATIONS AT THE
ASIA SOCIETY.
SO, ORVILLE, WHAT IS THE
STRATEGIC ADVANTAGE FOR THE
ALIGNMENT OF RUSSIA AND CHINA
AGAIN?
>> WELL, I THINK BOTH RUSSIA AND
CHINA FIND THEMSELVES AT ODDS
WITH THE WEST.
OF COURSE, RUSSIA AND PUTIN IN
THE CRIMEA AND THE UKRAINE, AND
CHINA IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA,
AND THE ISLANDS WITH JAPAN, SO
THE TENDENCY, I THINK WHEN THEY
FIND THEY MET WITH THIS WESTERN
RESISTANCE IS TO TEAM UP.
HOWEVER, ONE SHOULD BE CAREFUL
TO NOTE THEY HAVE NOT ALWAYS HAD
A VERY CLOSE AND FRIENDLY
HISTORICAL RELATIONSHIP.
>> SO, WHAT ARE SOME OF THE
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES?
IS THERE INVESTMENT OR POTENTIAL
INVESTMENT BETWEEN CHINA AND
RUSSIA, CHINA PUTTING MONEY INTO
RUSSIA OR THE OTHER WAY AROUND?
>> WELL, THE CHINESE HAVE A
HABIT OF MOVING INTO VACUUMS
WHERE THE WEST WILL SANCTION A
COUNTRY, WHETHER IT IS SUDAN OR
IRAN, OTHER SUCH COUNTRIES,
VENEZUELA, BECAUSE IT IS AN
OPPORTUNITY, AND I THINK THEY
VIEW RUSSIA VERY MUCH THIS WAY.
RUSSIA HAS ENERGY, CHINA NEEDS
ENERGY, AND CHINA HAS NOW VERY,
IS VERY KEEN TO BOTH SORT OF
CONSOLIDATE THE RELATIONSHIP
WITH PUTIN, GIVE HIM LOANS, MAKE
OIL AND GAS DEALS.
THEY SIGNED SOME DEALS FOR
WEAPONS AND NEW S 400 MISSILE
THAT RUSSIA IS NOW SELLING TO
CHINA.
SO THINGS ARE GETTING MUCH, MUCH
CLOSER THAN THEY WERE BEFORE.
>> EXPAND ON THE MILITARY
RELATIONSHIP AS WELL.
WHEN THESE TWO COUNTRIES DECIDE
TO ALIGN, THERE IS THAT, NOT
JUST AN ENEMY, A SPECIFIC ENEMY
BUT AS LARGE THE EUROPEAN UNION
AND THE UNITED STATES AND THE
WEST SEEM TO BE IN A DIFFERENT
CAMP, ESPECIALLY IN TERMS OF
RUSSIA'S INTERVENTION IN THE
UKRAINE.
>> WELL, MILITARILY SPEAKING,
THE WEST HAS NEVER SOLD ANY
AMOUNT OF WEAPONRY TO CHINA.
IT IS ALMOST ALL COMES FROM
RUSSIA.
SO THERE, ADVANCED FIGHTER JETS,
THEIR MISSILE SYSTEMS, AVIONICS,
THINGS LIKE THAT HAVE LARGELY
COME FROM RUSSIA AND SOME FROM
ISRAEL, NOW THEY ARE REALLY
BEEFING UP THIS RELATIONSHIP,
AND EACH HAS SOMETHING TO GIVE
TO THE OTHER AND THEY SHARE
5,000-MILE BORDER.
THERE IS TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OF
TRADE IN NATURAL RESOURCES
COMING FROM RUSSIA AND CHINA SO
THERE IS KIND OF A NATURAL
SYMMETRY THERE.
MORE THAN THAT THERE ALSO IS A
PSYCHOLOGICAL SYMMETRY, BOTH
FEEL THEY WERE BIG EMPIRES THAT
WERE SOMEHOW DISMEMBERED
THROUGH PREDATORY ACTIONS OF THE
WEST AND JAPAN, AND THERE IS A
KIND OF A VICTIM CULTURE THAT
BOTH SHARE, WHICH I THINK
PSYCHOLOGICALLY SPEAKING DRIVES
THEM CLOSE TOGETHER.
>> ALL RIGHT.
ORVILLE SCHELL OF THE ASIA
SOCIETY, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
OUR ORIGINAL IN-DEPTH REPORTS
FROM AROUND THE NATION AND
AROUND THE WORLD.
THE RECENT UNREST IN BALTIMORE
CALLED ATTENTION TO CONCENTRATED
POVERTY IN A NUMBER OF
NEIGHBORHOODS ACROSS THE NATION.
IT'S A PROBLEM THAT GOES BACK
DECADES, BUT THAT HAS
INTENSIFIED IN RECENT YEARS.
NOW, LOCAL OFFICIALS, WORKING
WITH PROMINENT BUSINESSMEN,
INCLUDING WARREN BUFFET, ARE
TRYING A COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH
TO HELP RESIDENTS OF THESE
NEIGHBORHOODS IMPROVE THEIR
CIRCUMSTANCES.
OUR REPORT FROM ATLANTA BY
NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT MEGAN
THOMPSON IS PART OF OUR
CONTINUING SERIES EXPLORING
POVERTY AND OPPORTUNITY IN
AMERICA.
WE CALL IT "CHASING THE DREAM."
>> Reporter: JIMMY WILLIAMS HAS
LIVED ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
ATLANTA FOR MOST OF HIS 37
YEARS.
EVEN BEFORE HE WAS BORN, WHITE
RESIDENTS OF THE NEIGHBORHOODS
AROUND HERE HAD BEGUN LEAVING
FOR THE SUBURBS; AND LATER, BIG
EMPLOYERS LIKE A NEARBY GENERAL
MOTORS PLANT SHUT DOWN.
MANY AREAS AROUND HERE HAVE BEEN
STRUGGLING FOR DECADES.
>> WHEN I WAS GROWING UP,
THIS... WOW.
WHEN I WAS GROWING UP, IT'S...
SOME OF THESE STREETS, YOU
BETTER NOT WALK DOWN.
OUT OF EVERYBODY THAT I GREW UP
WITH, LET'S SEE, I CAN COUNT
PROBABLY ABOUT FIVE OF THEM
THAT'S STILL LIVING AND NOT IN
PRISON.
>> Reporter: AFTER HIGH SCHOOL,
THINGS WENT SOUTH FOR WILLIAMS,
TOO.
HIS FATHER HAD DIED, HIS MOM HAD
CANCER AND NEEDED HELP PAYING
MEDICAL BILLS.
WILLIAMS' MINIMUM WAGE JOB AT A
GROCERY STORE WASN'T CUTTING IT,
SO WILLIAMS SAYS HE DID THE ONLY
THING HE COULD SEE TO MAKE
ENOUGH MONEY TO PAY THE BILLS.
HE STARTED DEALING COCAINE.
DID YOU SEE PEOPLE DOING WHAT
YOU DID AROUND YOU WHEN YOU GREW
UP?
>> YEAH.
I MEAN, THAT... THAT WAS THE
ENTIRE NEIGHBORHOOD.
THAT'S WHAT IT WAS.
THAT WAS THE WHOLE NEIGHBORHOOD.
THAT'S HOW I GOT INTO IT.
>> Reporter: HE ENDED UP IN
PRISON FOR SEVEN YEARS.
HIS MOTHER PASSED AWAY WHEN HE
WAS IN THERE.
>> AND THAT'S THE WORST THING
THAT COULD HAVE EVER HAPPENED TO
ME, BECAUSE I THINK ABOUT THAT
EVERY TIME I LOOK AT SOMEBODY
SELLING DOPE ON THE STREET,
I'M LIKE, "DON'T YOU KNOW THE
PEOPLE THAT YOU LOVE CAN LEAVE
YOU WHILE YOU IN THE MIDST OF
YOUR DESTRUCTION?
DON'T YOU KNOW THAT?"
>> Reporter: STORIES LIKE
WILLIAMS' ARE COMMON IN MANY
NEIGHBORHOODS ON ATLANTA'S SOUTH
SIDE.
EXPERTS SAY AREAS LIKE THIS
AROUND THE NATION SUFFER FROM
WHAT THEY CALL "CONCENTRATED
POVERTY."
>> IT'S A SMALL NUMBER OF
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE YOU HAVE A
LARGE NUMBER OF AMERICA'S LOWEST
INCOME PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: ROLF PENDALL OF THE
URBAN INSTITUTE IN WASHINGTON,
D.C., SAYS THERE'S BEEN A
DRAMATIC INCREASE IN THE NUMBER
OF PEOPLE LIVING IN HIGH-POVERTY
NEIGHBORHOODS, ALMOST 80% SINCE
2000-- PLACES WHERE PEOPLE WITH
MONEY HAVE FLED AND COMPANIES
HAVE DISINVESTED, MUCH OF IT
COMPOUNDED BY A LEGACY OF RACISM
AND SEGREGATION, HE SAYS.
>> AND THOSE WHO ARE LEFT BEHIND
FIND THEMSELVES INCREASINGLY
ISOLATED IN NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE
NO ONE WANTS TO INVEST, AND FEW
PEOPLE WANT TO COME IN IF THEY
HAVE A CHOICE.
THE BUSINESSES DON'T WANT TO
COME IN.
EMPLOYERS DON'T WANT TO LOCATE
THERE.
SO, THOSE ARE NEIGHBORHOODS
OF... OF KIND OF ALMOST
NEIGHBORHOODS OF LAST RESORT.
IT'S EXTREMELY DIFFICULT FOR THE
PEOPLE WHO... WHO REMAIN BEHIND
TO... TO GET AHEAD.
>> Reporter: HOW TO TURN AROUND
AREAS OF CONCENTRATED POVERTY
HAS BEEN A QUESTION AMERICAN
CITIES HAVE LONG GRAPPLED WITH,
BUT EXPERTS LIKE PENDALL POINT
TO ANOTHER NEIGHBORHOOD, ABOUT
SIX MILES AWAY ON THE EAST SIDE
OF ATLANTA.
EAST LAKE HAS BECOME A MODEL
SUPPORTED BY AMERICA'S SECOND
RICHEST PERSON, INVESTOR WARREN
BUFFETT.
>> THE AMERICAN DREAM HAS BEEN
VERY REAL FOR MILLIONS AND
MILLIONS OF PEOPLE OVER THE
YEARS, BUT THERE'S BEEN AN
AMERICAN NIGHTMARE THAT HAS
ACCOMPANIED THAT.
AND THAT'S WHERE PEOPLE THAT
EQUALLY HAVE TRIED TO GET
EDUCATED AND WORKED HARD AND HAD
GOOD HABITS HAVE FOUND
THEMSELVES LIVING A LIFE THAT'S
BEEN ON THE EDGE THROUGHOUT
THEIR ENTIRE LIVES AND THE SAME
FOR THEIR CHILDREN.
AND AMERICA CAN DO BETTER THAN
THAT.
>> Reporter: IN 2009, BUFFETT,
ATLANTA REAL ESTATE DEVELOPER
TOM COUSINS AND FORMER HEDGE
FUND MANAGER JULIAN ROBERTSON
HELPED FUND A NEW ORGANIZATION
CALLED PURPOSE-BUILT
COMMUNITIES.
THE GROUP NOW ADVISES LOCAL NON-
PROFITS AND GOVERNMENTS IN HIGH-
POVERTY AREAS IN 11 CITIES,
INCLUDING NEW ORLEANS, COLUMBUS
AND BUFFETT'S HOME TOWN OF
OMAHA.
ITS STRATEGY IS TO FIGHT
CONCENTRATED POVERTY ON MULTIPLE
FRONTS ALL AT ONCE.
IT OFTEN STARTS BY TEARING DOWN
LOW-INCOME HOUSING PROJECTS AND
REPLACING THEM WITH MIXED INCOME
UNITS, BUT IT GOES BEYOND
HOUSING.
THE MODEL ALSO INCLUDES BUILDING
NEW SCHOOLS, ESTABLISHING HEALTH
AND WELLNESS INITIATIVES--
THERE'S EVEN JOB PLACEMENT
SERVICES-- ALL OF IT COORDINATED
BY A LOCAL NON-PROFIT.
>> YOU COULDN'T DO IT PIECEMEAL.
YOU REALLY HAD TO HAVE SOMETHING
THAT WAS TRANSFORMATIVE IN
NATURE.
>> Reporter: PURPOSE-BUILT
COMMUNITIES' WORK IS MODELED ON
WHAT BEGAN AS AN EXPERIMENT ON
THE EAST SIDE OF ATLANTA IN THE
'90s, A TIME WHEN, ACROSS
ATLANTA AND THE U.S., MANY BIG
PUBLIC HOUSING PROJECTS WERE
BEING TORN DOWN AND REPLACED
WITH MIXED-INCOME DEVELOPMENTS.
>> IN THE 1980s, THIS WAS THE
ONLY COMMUNITY IN THE CITY THAT
I WOULD NOT DRIVE TO ALONE.
I WAS TERRIFIED.
>> Reporter: YOU WERE SCARED TO
COME HERE.
>> I WAS SCARED TO COME HERE
ALONE.
>> Reporter: SHIRLEY FRANKLIN IS
THE FORMER MAYOR OF ATLANTA AND
NOW THE HEAD OF PURPOSE-BUILT
COMMUNITIES, THE GROUP WARREN
BUFFETT SUPPORTS.
SO, WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
CONCENTRATED POVERTY, THIS...
THIS WAS IT.
>> THIS WAS ONE OF THE WORST
EXAMPLES.
>> Reporter: THE NEIGHBORHOOD
WAS HOME TO A DANGEROUS HOUSING
PROJECT CALLED EAST LAKE MEADOWS
AND BORDERED A ONCE-FAMOUS GOLF
COURSE THAT HAD ALSO FALLEN INTO
DISREPAIR, BUT STEP BY STEP, TOM
COUSINS, THE CITY OF ATLANTA AND
OTHER PARTNERS TRIED THEIR
EXPERIMENT.
THEY KNOCKED DOWN EAST LAKE
MEADOWS AND REPLACED IT WITH NEW
APARTMENTS, HALF SUBSIDIZED,
HALF MARKET-RATE.
THEY BUILT A NEW CHARTER SCHOOL.
THE WELLNESS PART WAS SOLVED BY
OPENING UP A Y.M.C.A. AND THE
NEIGHBORHOOD'S FIRST GROCERY
STORE IN 40 YEARS.
THERE WERE JOB PLACEMENT
SERVICES FOR RESIDENTS, TOO.
AND THE EAST LAKE FOUNDATION WAS
LAUNCHED TO COORDINATE ALL THE
WORK.
LIKE THE OTHER MIXED-INCOME
DEVELOPMENTS GOING UP AROUND
ATLANTA AT THE TIME, THERE WERE
ALSO NEW RULES.
YOU HAD TO HAVE A JOB TO LIVE
THERE, AND A CRIMINAL RECORD
MADE IT HARDER TO GET IN.
EAST LAKE BEGAN TO CHANGE, AND
WORD WAS GETTING OUT TO PEOPLE
LIKE MARILYN HACK, A MOTHER OF
THREE WHO WAS ANXIOUS TO MOVE
OUT OF A HIGH-POVERTY
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> THERE'S A SAYING ABOUT BEING
A PRODUCT OF YOUR ENVIRONMENT,
AND I WAS JUST WORRIED ABOUT
THAT, THAT THEY'LL GET CAUGHT UP
AND THEY WON'T BE AMBITIOUS AND
THEY WON'T... SO, THAT'S WHY,
WHEN THEY CAME HOME, IT WAS
ALWAYS, "WASH YOUR HANDS, GET A
SNACK, HOMEWORK."
ALWAYS.
AND I STILL DO IT TO THIS DAY,
>> Reporter: BUT YOU WERE AFRAID
THAT NO MATTER HOW HARD YOU
TRIED THERE, IT COULD BE THAT
THIS ENVIRONMENT MIGHT IMPACT
THEM IN WAYS THAT YOU JUST
COULDN'T CONTROL.
>> YEAH.
THAT'S WHY WHEN A NEIGHBOR CAME
AND TOLD ME ABOUT THIS COMMUNITY
THAT HAD, "OH, THERE'S SOME
PLACE ACCEPTING APPLICATIONS,
AND WE SHOULD TRY IT."
>> Reporter: IN 2000, HACK MOVED
IN TO EAST LAKE.
THE SINGLE MOTHER WHO HAD BEEN
MAKING $10,000 A YEAR AS A
NURSE'S ASSISTANT EARNED TWO
ASSOCIATES DEGREES AND FOUND A
NEW JOB WITH THE HELP OF THE
EAST LAKE JOB CENTER.
TODAY, SHE MAKES $60,000 A YEAR
AS A REGISTERED NURSE AND HAS
HER OWN BUSINESS TEACHING C.P.R.
HER OLDEST TWO KIDS WENT TO
COLLEGE, ONE EVEN GOT A Ph.D.
AND HER 18-YEAR-OLD IS GOING IN
THE FALL, WITH A SCHOLARSHIP
FROM THE EAST LAKE FOUNDATION.
>> MY BIG THING WAS, WE'RE GOING
TO GET COLLEGE DEGREES.
WE ARE ALL GOING TO GET COLLEGE
DEGREES.
TWO-DEGREE MINIMUM.
THAT WAS MY THOUGHT, MY GOAL, MY
EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter: SUPPORTERS SAY
MARILYN'S STORY ILLUSTRATES JUST
HOW EAST LAKE HAS IMPROVED THE
LIVES OF THE LOW-INCOME PEOPLE
WHO CAME TO LIVE THERE.
THERE ARE OTHER MEASUREMENTS,
TOO.
VIOLENT CRIME THERE IS DOWN BY
90% AND STUDENT TEST SCORES HAVE
RISEN DRAMATICALLY.
A FEDERAL PROGRAM IS EVEN NOW
TRYING AN APPROACH SIMILAR TO
EAST LAKE'S.
THE GOLF COURSE WAS ALSO
RESTORED, AND TODAY HOSTS THE
CULMINATING EVENT DURING THE
P.G.A. PLAYOFF CHAMPIONSHIPS.
THE CLUB'S PROCEEDS HELP FUND
THE EAST LAKE FOUNDATION, WHICH
CONTINUES THE WORK IN THE
COMMUNITY, THE WORK NOW BEING
REPLICATED IN OTHER CITIES.
HERE AT EAST LAKE, YOU HAVE A
VERY WEALTHY MAN WHO'S MADE THIS
HIS PERSONAL PROJECT.
YOU'VE GOT A VERY FAMOUS GOLF
COURSE NEXT DOOR THAT'S
GENERATED MILLIONS OF DOLLARS TO
HELP SUPPORT THE WORK.
THOSE ARE SOME REALLY UNIQUE
CIRCUMSTANCES HERE.
HOW CAN OTHER CITIES REPLICATE
THE MODEL WHEN THEY MIGHT NOT BE
SO LUCKY?
>> WELL, EVERY CITY AND EVERY
COMMUNITY HAS SOME ASSETS, AND
OUR MODEL DOES NOT REQUIRE A
GOLF COURSE.
AND WE HAVE FOUND THAT MONEY IS
NOT THE HARDEST PART OF THIS;
THE BIGGEST OBSTACLE IS
COMMITTED LEADERSHIP-- WHO'S
WILLING TO WORK ACROSS ALL
SECTORS AND WITH ALL SECTORS OF
THE COMMUNITY TO FIND A PLAN
THAT WORKS FOR THEM?
>> Reporter: THE DEVELOPMENT AT
EAST LAKE DIDN'T COME WITHOUT
CONTROVERSIES, EITHER.
RISING PROPERTY VALUES MEAN THE
SURROUNDING AREA'S BECOME LESS
AFFORDABLE, AND THERE ARE FEWER
APARTMENTS FOR LOW-INCOME
FAMILIES THAN THERE USED TO BE.
THE ORIGINAL PROJECT HAD 650
SUBSIDIZED UNITS; TODAY, THERE
ARE ONLY 270.
THE REST ARE MARKET-RATE.
ONE STUDY FOUND THAT MANY OF THE
PEOPLE FORCED TO LEAVE WHEN
HOUSING PROJECTS WERE TORN DOWN
ACROSS ATLANTA JUST ENDED UP IN
OTHER HIGH-POVERTY AREAS.
DID THE PROJECT SOLVE THE
PROBLEM OF CONCENTRATED POVERTY,
OR WERE PEOPLE PUSHED OUT?
WAS IT... THE PROBLEM PUSHED TO
OTHER PARTS OF ATLANTA?
>> WE... WE HAVE A PROBLEM IF
WHAT WE TRY TO DO IS, IN MY
OPINION AND IN MY EXPERIENCE, IF
WE'RE NOT WILLING TO SHAKE THE
WHOLE THING UP.
IN OTHER WORDS, IF WE'RE NOT
LOOKING, WE'RE NOT WILLING TO
CHANGE THE PARADIGM.
THE QUESTION IS, WHAT MIGHT
WORK?
WE BELIEVE THAT YOU HAVE TO HAVE
THAT MIX OF INCOME BOTH TO
ATTRACT THE AMENITIES AND... AND
THE SUPPORT, BUT ALSO TO WELL
SERVE THE PEOPLE WHO ARE AT THE
LOWEST END.
>> THINGS HAVE GOT TO CHANGE
AROUND HERE.
>> Reporter: JIMMY WILLIAMS
HOPES HIS NEIGHBORHOOD ON THE
SOUTH SIDE OF ATLANTA WILL
CHANGE THE WAY THE EAST SIDE
HAS.
>> THERE'S AN APOCALYPSE THAT'S
HAPPENING EVERY DAY, AND IT'S
CALLED POVERTY.
>> Reporter: AFTER PRISON, HE
STARTED HIS OWN CONTRACTING
BUSINESS AND IS DEDICATED TO
IMPROVING THE IMPOVERISHED
NEIGHBORHOODS AROUND HERE,
REHABBING ABANDONED HOMES AND
BUILDING AN URBAN FARM; DOING
WHAT HE CAN TO KEEP KIDS FROM
FALLING INTO THE SAME TRAPS THAT
HE DID, TRAPS THAT JUST DON'T
SEEM TO GO AWAY.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE WHAT
CONCENTRATED POVERTY REALLY
LOOKS LIKE.
GO ON A TOUR OF A SOUTH ATLANTA
NEIGHBORHOOD STRUGGLING TO GET
BY.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: AUSTIN, TEXAS IS
ONE OF THE FASTEST-GROWING
CITIES IN THE NATION, A MAGNET
FOR THE TECH INDUSTRY AND THE
ARTS.
BUT NOT EVERYONE HERE IS
ENJOYING THE GOOD TIMES.
MANY STUDENTS LIVE BELOW THE
POVERTY LINE, AND SOME OF THEIR
TEACHERS ARE STRUGGLING TO PAY
THE RENT.
KLRU'S ALLISON SANDZA REPORTS.
>> Reporter: LUPE RODRIGUEZ IS A
HIGH SCHOOL SPANISH TEACHER, A
COACH, AND A PART-TIME SOCCER
REFEREE.
AND HE'S SPENDING HIS SUNDAY
MORNING THE SAME WAY HE SPENT
SATURDAY.
>> I'VE BEEN REFFING FOR
ABOUT A YEAR AND A HALF, FOR A
COUPLE OF DIFFERENT REASONS.
OBVIOUSLY THE EXTRA INCOME, I
ENJOY SOCCER, SO I'M LUCKY
ENOUGH THAT I'M ABLE TO DO
SOMETHING THAT LETS ME EXERCISE
AND PROVIDES A LITTLE EXTRA
INCOME.
>> Reporter: JIM FULBRIGHT IS IN
A SIMILAR SITUATION.
LIKE RODRIGUEZ, AND SO MANY
OTHER TEACHERS HERE IN AUSTIN,
HE'S HAVING TROUBLE MAKING ENDS
MEET.
>> WHAT I DO FIND IS THAT WITH
THE AMOUNT OF MONEY THAT I MAKE
WORKING FOR THE SCHOOL DISTRICT
I AM DIPPING INTO MY SAVINGS
CONTINUOUSLY.
>> Reporter: MEDIAN HOME PRICES
HAVE INCREASED 34% IN THE LAST
FOUR YEARS IN THE AUSTIN AREA,
WHILE TEACHER PAY HAS GONE UP
ONLY 5% IN RECENT YEARS.
THIS HAS FORCED MANY AUSTIN
TEACHERS FAR INTO THE SUBURBS TO
AFFORD HOMES TO BUY.
>> THE RATE OF INCREASE HAS
CLEARLY BEEN MOST RAPID IN
AUSTIN AND THEN MOST RAPID WOULD
BE THE SAN ANTONIO METROPOLITAN
AREA BECAUSE THESE ARE THE KINDS
OF PLACES THAT HAVE GROWN FROM
RELATIVELY SLEEPY, SMALL
CITIES TO EXTREMELY LARGE,
VIBRANT, CROWDED CITIES
WHERE THE COST OF LIVING IS
SUBSTANTIALLY HIGHER.
>> Reporter: DR. LORI TAYLOR
RUNS THE MOSBACHER INSTITUTE AT
THE GEORGE BUSH SCHOOL OF
GOVERNMENT AT TEXAS A&M
UNIVERSITY.
SHE STUDIES REGIONAL DIFFERENCES
IN EDUCATION COSTS.
>> THE MORE DESIRABLE TEACHERS,
THE MORE TALENTED TEACHERS, ARE
GOING TO SORT THEMSELVES OUT TO
THE MORE DESIRABLE JOBS AND YOU
CAN WIND UP FILLING THOSE
POSITIONS WITH INDIVIDUALS WHO
DON'T HAVE THE SAME KINDS OF
CREDENTIALS THAN YOU WOULD BE
ABLE TO FILL IF YOU WERE PAYING
A MARKET WAGE.
>> Reporter: AND WHILE AUSTIN'S
REAL ESTATE BOOM DOES MEAN MORE
TAX REVENUE FOR THE CITY, THAT
DOESN'T NECESSARILY MEAN MORE
MONEY FOR THE DISTRICT.
BY STATE LAW, COMMONLY REFERRED
TO AS ROBIN HOOD, AUSTIN AND
OTHER HIGH PROPERTY TAX
DISTRICTS ARE REQUIRED TO SEND
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS BACK TO THE
STATE, WHICH IS THEN SENT TO
COMMUNITIES WITH LOWER TAX
REVENUE.
HUNDREDS OF TEXAS SCHOOL
DISTRICTS SUED THE STATE OVER
THE COMPLEX SCHOOL FUNDING
FORMULA, PART OF WHICH IS BASED
ON DATA FROM 1989.
A DISTRICT JUDGE IN AUSTIN RULED
IT UNCONSTITUTIONAL IN AUGUST.
THE TEXAS SUPREME COURT WILL
HEAR THE STATE'S APPEAL OF THAT
RULING LATER THIS YEAR.
>> I CALL IT A PIE FIGHT.
OF COURSE EVERYONE THAT'S
BENEFITING FROM THE CURRENT
FORMULA WANTS TO LEAVE IT LIKE
IT IS, EVERYBODY THAT'S NOT
BENEFITING WANTS TO CHANGE IT,
AND YOU CAN FLIP IT EITHER WAY.
THE DISTRICTS WILL SAY THEY
DON'T BELIEVE IN OUR CURRENT
DISTRIBUTION MODEL, THEY SAY
THAT IT'S FLAWED; THEY'VE TAKEN
THE STATE TO COURT AND SAID THE
DISTRIBUTION MODEL IS NOT
APPROPRIATE.
>> Reporter: AS ALL INVOLVED
WAIT TO SEE WHAT THE COURT WILL
DECIDE, AUSTIN'S TEACHERS WATCH
THEIR CITY GROW UP AROUND THEM
AND FEAR THEY'LL BE PRICED OUT
OF THE PROSPERITY.
>> IF YOU MAKE MORE MONEY IN
AUSTIN BUT YOU TURN AROUND AND
HAND IT OVER TO YOUR LANDLORD
YOU'RE LEFT WITH A VERY LEAN
BUDGET.
ELSEWHERE IN THE STATE THAT SAME
SALARY GOES A LOT FURTHER
BECAUSE THE CHECK YOU WRITE TO
THE LANDLORD IS A WHOLE LOT
SMALLER.
>> TEACHERS ARE ALREADY USED TO
LIVING ON A SHOESTRING.
I DON'T OWN ANY CLOTHING THAT I
DIDN'T GET FROM A THRIFT STORE
AND NEITHER DO MY KIDS.
WE KNOW HOW TO DO IT ON THE
CHEAP.
WE CAN'T DO IT ON THE NOTHING.
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM ENGLAND,
WORD TONIGHT OF PROGRESS BY
SCIENTISTS TRYING TO DESIGN
CUSTOMIZED TREATMENTS FOR
CANCER, SPECIFICALLY TAILORED
TREATMENTS BASED ON THE MAKEUP
OF AN INDIVIDUAL'S TUMOR.
ITV'S SCIENCE EDITOR TOM CLARK
VISITED A LABORATORY AND MET
WITH RESEARCHERS.
HE HAS THE LATEST.
>> INSIDE THE COZY CONFINES OF
THIS INCUBATOR, HUMAN CELLS ARE
GROWING.
BUT THEY ARE NOT ANY OLD CELLS.
THEY HAVE BEEN SPECIALLY GROWN
FROM TUMORS DONATED BY 20 COLON
CANCER PATIENTS AND WHAT IS
REMARKABLE IS HOW THEY HAVE BEEN
PERSUADED TO GROW INTO A
MINIATURE VERSION OF THE
ORIGINAL TUMOR.
THESE AREN'T JUST CANCER CELLS
SITTING IN A DISH.
THEY ARE IN ESSENCE A REAL
PATIENT'S TUMOR, NURTURED IN THE
LABORATORY BECAUSE THEY HAVE ALL
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
DEADLY CANCER INSIDE THEIR BODY.
BY DOING THIS IN THIS WAY, THE
RESEARCHERS CAN EXPLOIT EACH OF
ITS INDIVIDUAL STRENGTHS AND
WEAKNESSES.
IT IS A STEP TOWARDS
PERSONALIZED CANCER TREATMENT.
>> YOU CAN HAVE TEN DIFFERENT
PATIENTS IN A ROOM AND GIVE
THEM ALL THE SAME TREATMENT, AND
THEY WILL ALL RESPOND VERY
DIFFERENTLY, AND A LOT OF
THIS COMES DOWN TO THE VARIATION
IN EACH OF THE TUMORS THAT THE
PATIENTS HAVE.
>> IN THIS LATEST RESEARCH, THE
TEAM HERE SCREEN THEIR CANCER
ORGANS AGAINST 83 EXISTING
AND EXPERIMENTAL DRUGS.
IT SHOWED THE LAB-GROWN CANCERS
BEHAVED THE SAME AS THEIR REAL-
LIFE COUNTERPARTS AND ALSO INTO
THE POTENTIAL NEW TREATMENTS FOR
SOME COLON CANCER TYPES.
APPLIED MORE WIDELY, THE
TECHNIQUE COULD BE A GOLD MINE
FOR DRUG DISCOVERY.
THE DAYS OF TRULY INDIVIDUAL
CANCER TREATMENT ARE NOT QUITE
UPON US, BUT THEY ARE COMING
FAST.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT:
IRAQI OFFICIALS NOW CONFIRM THAT
ISIS WAS BEHIND THAT PRISON RIOT
NORTH OF BAGHDAD TODAY THAT LED
TO THE ESCAPE OF CONVICTED
TERRORISTS.
DOZENS DIED DURING THE INCIDENT.
AND STORMY WEATHER HAS LED TO
THE CANCELLATION OF MORE THAN
140 FLIGHTS INTO AND OUT OF
DALLAS TODAY.
WE'LL BE BACK HERE AT KLRU IN
AUSTIN AGAIN TOMORROW NIGHT.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.